---
layout: post
title:  "Call Python function From C!"
date:   2022-08-31 11:58:45 +0530
categories: go-c-python
---

`CPython` is one of the many python runtimes. It contains both a [runtime](https://www.techtarget.com/searchsoftwarequality/definition/runtime) and a shared language specification that all the python runtimes use. Python's official implementation is in C, which is referred as CPython.

This means that we can make use of the Python features in `C` and vice-versa using the `CPython` API . The scope of this blog will be limited to calling python functions from `C`. For detailed information please refer the [docs](https://docs.python.org/3/extending/index.html)

Let's start with a python function that we want to call from `C`. We have the following `area` function defined in `Rectangle.py` which calculates the area of a rectangle. 
<figure>
  <figcaption>File: ~/cpython/Rectangle.py</figcaption>
{% highlight python linenos %}
def area(a, b):
    return a*b
{% endhighlight %}
</figure>

Now our goal is to execute this python function from C by making use of the `CPython` API. First I will add the `C` code below, which calls the python function  and then I will explain each and every line of the code to make it clear to the reader. The code itself is documented as well.

<figure>
  <figcaption>File: ~/cpython/ctopy.c</figcaption>
{% highlight c linenos %}
#include<Python.h>

double call_func(PyObject *func, double x, double y)
{
    PyObject *args;
    PyObject *kwargs;
    PyObject *result = 0;
    double retval;
      
    //https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/call.html#call-support-api
    // Verify that func is a callable
    if (!PyCallable_Check(func))
    {
        fprintf(stderr, "call_func: expected a callable\n");
        goto fail;
    }
    
	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/arg.html#building-values
	// Build args tuple which will be passed to python func
	args = Py_BuildValue("(dd)", x, y);
	kwargs = NULL;
	
	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/call.html#c.PyObject_Call
	// Call the python function
	result = PyObject_Call(func, args, kwargs);

	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/refcounting.html#c.Py_DecRef
	// Decrease the referece since Py_BuildValue returns a new ref.
	Py_DECREF(args);

	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/refcounting.html#c.Py_XDECREF
	// Decrease the reference using XDECREF because kwargs is NULL
	Py_XDECREF(kwargs);
	
	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/exceptions.html#c.PyErr_Occurred
	// Check if python function was executed without any error.
	if (PyErr_Occurred())
	{
		PyErr_Print();
		goto fail;
	}
	
	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/float.html#c.PyFloat_Check
	// Verify the result is a float object
	if (!PyFloat_Check(result))
	{
		fprintf(stderr, "call_func: callable didn't return a float\n");
		goto fail;
	}
	
	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/float.html#c.PyFloat_AsDouble
	// Convert PyFloat to C double
	retval = PyFloat_AsDouble(result);
	Py_DECREF(result);
	
	return retval;
	fail:
		Py_XDECREF(result);
		abort();
}


/* Load a symbol from a module */
PyObject *import_function(const char *modname, const char *symbol)
{
	PyObject *u_name, *module;

	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/unicode.html#c.PyUnicode_FromString
	// Convert Unicode Object from UTF-8 encoded char buffer.
	u_name = PyUnicode_FromString(modname);
	if(u_name == NULL){
		printf("Couldnot convert string to unicode\n");
		return NULL;
	}

	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/import.html#c.PyImport_Import
	// Import the module, PyImport_Import performs absolute import
	module = PyImport_Import(u_name);
	
	
	if(module == NULL){
		printf("Couldnot Import Module\n");
		return NULL;
	}
		
	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/object.html#c.PyObject_GetAttrString
	// Get the function from module 
	// This is the equivalent of the Python expression o.attr_name.
	return PyObject_GetAttrString(module, symbol);
}


int main()
{
	PyObject *area_func;
	double x,y;

	// https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/init.html#c.Py_Initialize
	// Initialize the Python interpreter and
	// since version 3.7 it also create the GIL explicitly by calling PyEval_InitThreads()
	// so you don’t have to call PyEval_InitThreads() yourself anymore
	Py_Initialize();
	
	// Get a reference to the Area.area function
	area_func = import_function("Rectangle", "area");
	
	if(area_func == NULL){
		return -1;
	}
	// Call it using our call_func() code
	for (x = 0.0,y=10.0; x <= 10.0 && y>=0 ; x += 0.5, y-=0.5)
	{
		printf("x : % 0.2f y : % 0.2f Area : % 0.2f\n", x, y, call_func(area_func, x, y));
	}
		
	Py_DECREF(area_func);

	// Undo all initializations made by Py_Initialize() and subsequent
	Py_Finalize();
	return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}
</figure>

On line `1` we include the Python.h header which is the entry point of Python C API.

On line `102` inside the `main` function we Initialize the python interpreter. Since we are executing the python code from `C` we need to initialize the interpreter where we can execute the python byte code. This line will Initialize the python Interpreter and will create the GIL explicitly by calling `PyEval_InitThreads` and lock it.
Any python operation that we perform on the interpreter should be done only when the GIL is locked. Python interpreter is not fully thread safe hence we need to take care of GIL here as we are performing python operations from C. More information about the GIL can be found [here](https://realpython.com/python-gil/). 

The convention that we follow while performing a python operation is as follows:
 - Lock the GIL
 - Do Python
 - Unlock the GIL

 In the code above the GIL is locked when we initialize the interpreter, so we don't lock it explicitly anywhere in the whole program because the above program is single threaded. 

 On line no. `105` we import the `area` function from `Rectangle.py`. Inside the `import_function` on line no `64` takes `module name` and `function name` as arguments. It converts `module name` to `PyObject` using `PyUnicode_FromString` on line `70` which is passed as an argument to `PyImport_Import` on line 78. After we import the module we get the required function on line no 89 using `PyObject_GetAttrString`, this function is an equivalent of Python expression `o.attr_name`, where `o` is the object and `attr_name` is the attribute that we want to get.

After we import the `area` function its time to call the function from `C`. On line no `111-114` we have a for loop that has two variables x and y which we pass as an argument to `call_func`, we also pass the `area_func` which is our `area` function in `Rectangle.py` as an argument to `call_func`.

`call_func` is defined on line no. `3`. In this function we first check whether the `func` that we have passed is callable or not. `PyObject_Call` on line `25` calls the python function with `args` and `kwargs`, in order to make this function call first we prepare these arguments. On line `20` we build a tuple with `x` and `y` which are our positional arguments which we pass as `args`, `kwargs` is `NULL` because we don't have any keyword arguments in our `area` function. This is where we call our `area` function and get its output.

Before we further go thorugh the code, We need to know about Python's Memory management which you can read [here](https://docs.python.org/3/c-api/memory.html). This is a pre-requisite that needs to be understood before we go through the other section of `call_func`.


`Py_BuildValue` on line no 20 returns a new reference to a PyObject, everytime a new reference to a PyObject is created in memory, it's the responsibility of the programmer to decrease its reference count. If the object's reference count is not decreased then the Python Garbage Collector won't remove that object from the memory and we will end up having a memory leak. 

After the `args` is used we decrease it's reference count on line no 29 using `Py_DECREF`. We use `Py_XDECREF` to decrease the reference count of `kwargs`. In this case `kwargs` is `NULL` and we need not decrease any refernce count here, but using `Py_XDECREF` we demonstrate that it is possible to decrease the reference of those objects whose value is `NULL`. Whenever we are not sure of the value of the PyObject, we should use `Py_XDECREF`. More information of these functions can be found [here](https://stackoverflow.com/a/41915356)

On line `37` we make sure that `PyObject_Call` ran successfully without any errors, if there is any runtime error on python side, then we catch it and print it on line `39` using `PyErr_Print`.

On line `45` we check the result's type and make sure that it is a float object. On line `53` we convert the PyFloat object to C double using `PyFloat_AsDouble` and then we decrease the reference count of the result and we return the `retval` on line `56`.

After completion of the loop on line `111-114` we decrease the reference count of `area_func` and the call `Py_Finalize`, this will undo all the initializations made by Py_Initialize.


# How to run the above code

Create the two files add the respective C and Python code and save them in the same dir. In my case both the files are in `cpython` dir. Then follow the given commands to execute the code successfully.

```
cd cpython
export PYTHONPATH=.
cc -g ctopy.c -I/usr/include/python3.10 -L /usr/lib/python3.10/config-3.10-x86_64-linux-gnu -lpython3.10
```

The path to python interpreter might be different in your system, you would have to change that according to your requirements.

# Output

```
./a.out
x :  0.00 y :  10.00 Area :  0.00
x :  0.50 y :  9.50 Area :  4.75
x :  1.00 y :  9.00 Area :  9.00
x :  1.50 y :  8.50 Area :  12.75
x :  2.00 y :  8.00 Area :  16.00
x :  2.50 y :  7.50 Area :  18.75
x :  3.00 y :  7.00 Area :  21.00
x :  3.50 y :  6.50 Area :  22.75
x :  4.00 y :  6.00 Area :  24.00
x :  4.50 y :  5.50 Area :  24.75
x :  5.00 y :  5.00 Area :  25.00
x :  5.50 y :  4.50 Area :  24.75
x :  6.00 y :  4.00 Area :  24.00
x :  6.50 y :  3.50 Area :  22.75
x :  7.00 y :  3.00 Area :  21.00
x :  7.50 y :  2.50 Area :  18.75
x :  8.00 y :  2.00 Area :  16.00
x :  8.50 y :  1.50 Area :  12.75
x :  9.00 y :  1.00 Area :  9.00
x :  9.50 y :  0.50 Area :  4.75
x :  10.00 y :  0.00 Area :  0.00
```

References:

[cpython-docs](https://docs.python.org/3/extending/extending.html)

[GIL](https://realpython.com/python-gil/)

[Call Python from C](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/calling-python-from-c-set-1/)
